
Build Instructions -- Linux
--------

The Linux tree should build easily assuming that you have all the tools
properly installed.  You'll need gcc, make, and all the tools which usually
accompany them.

You'll also need GTK.

We have not attempted building of this tree under a wide variety of different Linux distributions
or environments.  One configuration which is known to work without difficulties is to simply
install Red Hat 5.1, and install "Everything".  Lots of other configurations should work too,
as long as you have the basic developments tools, and GTK.

Building the tree is a pretty simple process.  We use a "diving make" system, where virtually
every directory in the tree hierarchy has its own Makefile, which contains the instructions
for how to build the contents of that directory.

To get things started, just cd into the abi/src directory, and type 'make'.

Build Instructions -- Windows NT
--------

Building on Windows NT is remarkably similar to building on Linux.  We
use the same set of Makefiles on Linux as well as NT.  You'll need to
get the CygWin32 tool set from Cygnus before you can build.  See
http://www.cygnus.com/misc/gnu-win32/ for information and downloads.
The file you need should be called cdk.exe, and it's going to be
around 12 megabytes.  Installing this stuff on your NT machine will
create an environment which looks remarkably like a UNIX box.  You'll
get a standard bash shell, GNU make, and all the standard UNIX
utilities like sed, awk, cp, ls, mv, and so on.  This environment is
the key which allows us to use the same set of Makefiles for both NT
and Linux.

Just in case you're wondering, yes, it should be possible to build
this tree with a subset of the tools.  There's 12 meg of stuff there,
and we don't *really* need all of it.  However, we haven't had time or
motivation to identify the specific set of apps we need.  Disk space
is cheap.  If you decide to make the effort to do so, please let us
know, and we'll share that information with other developers.

You also need Visual C++ 5.0.  Obviously, we don't use the IDE at all,
but we do use the compiler, headers, libraries, and so on.  You'll
need them all to be in your PATH, since the Makefiles will expect them
to be readily available.

Once you have all this stuff installed, then you should be able to
build the tree in the same way that the Linux version builds.  Just cd
into the abi/src directory and type make.

Where to the binaries go?
--------

Our build system is derived from the one used by the NSPR library from
Mozilla.  Builds are placed in a directory which bears the name of the
platform on which the build is taking place, under abi/src/dist.  For
example, on my system, it builds under a directory called
Linux2.0.34_x86_DBG.OBJ.  Your mileage may vary.  Under that
directory, whatever it gets called on your system, you'll find a bin
directory.  Under there, you'll find AbiWord (or AbiWord.exe).




